# Fernando Brito Lopes

*Researcher in Quantitative Genetics and Genomics*

**Address:** Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa)

km 12 - Zona Rural GO-462

Santo Antonio de Goias - GO, 75375-000, Brazil

**Mobile Phone:** +55 (62) 99242-8390

**E-mail:** <camult@gmail.com>

**RESEARCH INTERESTS**

Quantitative and Molecular Genetics

Data Analysis, Big Data and Experimental Design

Bioinformatics, Biostatistics and Data Science

Statistical Genomics

**PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYMENT**

-   **Researcher**, School of Agrarian and Veterinary Sciences of São Paulo
    State University (UNESP). Jaboticabal, SP, Brazil (2018)

-   **Researcher**, Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa),
    Goiania, GO, Brazil (2018)

-   **Research Associate**, Department of Animal Sciences, University of
    Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA (2014 - 2017)

-   **Geneticist** GeneSeek, Inc., a Neogen Company, Lincoln, NE, USA (2016 -
    2017)

-   **Researcher - Technological and Industrial Development**, Brazilian
    Agricultural Research Corporation at Embrapa, Goiania, GO, Brazil (2016 -
    2017)

-   **Researcher**, Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa),
    Goiania, GO, Brazil (2012 - 2014)

-   **Lecturer**, Department of Animal Science, Federal University of Goias
    (UFG), Goiania, GO, Brazil (2011 - 2013)

-   **Lecturer**, Department of Animal Science, Federal University of Tocantins
    (UFT), Araguaina, TO, Brazil (2007 - 2008)

**ACADEMIC DEGREES**

-   **BS**, Animal Science, Federal University of Tocantins (UFT), Araguaina,
    TO, Brazil, June 2006.

-   **MS**, Animal Science, Federal University of Tocantins (UFT), Araguaina,
    TO, Brazil, March 2009.

-   **PhD**, Animal Science, Federal University of Goias (UFG), Goiania, GO,
    Brazil, August 2011.

**RESEARCH EXPERIENCE**

**2017 - present** *Genome-wide selection and feature subset selection of
markers by Bayesian networks in beef cattle using multiple-trait model*. *Brief
Description:* Several methods have been used for genome-enabled prediction,
where multiple regression models describe a target variable with a linear
function of a set or subset of covariates. Bayesian Networks has offered
interesting tools for a more parsimonious representation of the join
distribution of a set of variables, which are useful for prediction purposes,
e.g. using Markov Blanket (MB) of the target variable. Genome prediction studies
have been focused mostly on single-trait analyses. However, most of economically
important traits are genetically correlated, and it is expected to increase the
accuracy of prediction of genomic breeding values of genetically correlated
traits using multiple-trait model. Thus, this study will be carried out to
assess the accuracy of genomic prediction for carcass and meat quality traits in
Nellore cattle using multiple-trait model on two different scenarios: i)
genome-wide prediction using the whole SNP data; and ii) genomic prediction
using subset of SNP markers selected using MB.

**2017 - present** *Improving Prediction Accuracy of Meat Tenderness in Nelore
Cattle using Artificial Neural Networks*. *Brief Description:* Traditional
genetic selection for meat tenderness in beef cattle is constrained by the cost
and difficulty of its measurement, and genomic selection (GS) has arisen then as
an alternative to improve it. Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) are gaining
prominence in GS as it can fit complex relationships, potentially increasing
predictive accuracy. A special case of ANN is the Deep Neural Networks (DNN),
which have multiple hidden layers. DNN have been successfully used in the field
of image analysis and speech recognition, but few studies have applied it on GS.
Thus, this study was carried out to compare the predictive ability of ANN and
DNN with Bayesian Ridge Regression, Bayesian Lasso, Bayes A, Bayes B, and Bayes
C in estimating genomic breeding values for meat tenderness in Nelore cattle.

**2017 - present** *Genomic strategies applied to characterization and breeding
of Nelore beef cattle using next-generation sequencing*. *Brief Description:*
The maintenance of the genetic variability is essential to preservation of
alleles associated with rusticity and adaptability traits in Nelore breed, which
is considered the most important breed to beef production in Brazil. Although
the number of founders responsible for the formation of Nelore breed is small,
there are genetic differences among lines. The characterization of these lines
is important to directing mating to optimize the genetic progress consistent
with the objectives of selection and to control inbreeding. The aim of this
project is to describe the genomic structure of the Nelore population in Brazil
to develop strategies to control the maintenance of genetic variability and
inbreeding, as well as to improve the breeding goals of economic important
traits. For this, a total of 150 samples of semen from several Nelore lines will
be sequenced. The sequencing data will be used to identify homozygous segments,
selection signatures, as well as causal and structural variants in Nelore
genome. Imputation, genomic association and genomic selection studies will also
be performed considering the Nelore genotype and phenotypic data available for
the proposed project.

**2016 - present** *Genomic selection for improved fertility of dairy cows with
emphasis on cyclicity and pregnancy*. *Brief Description:* The goal is to
identify SNPs and haplotypes significantly associated with fertility traits by
use of genome-wide analyses (GWAS) and use this information to obtain
genomic-estimated breeding values that can be applied in selection of dairy
cattle for improved fertility. Genome-wide studies (GWAS and prediction models).
A GWAS will be conducted to detect genomic regions contributing to the variation
of each phenotypic trait considered (anovulation, uterine disease, detection of
estrus, pregnancy, and pregnancy loss), as well as for the reproductive index.

**2015 - present** *Causal effect of environmental factors on traits of economic
importance in beef cattle*. *Brief Description:* The knowledge of causal
relationships among growth traits is important to understand their biological
system, and to define more efficient strategies for animal breeding and
selection. This research goal is to investigate the causal structures involving
gestation length, and weight from birth to 450 days of age in Nellore cattle. A
multi-trait model and structural equation model will be fitted conditionally on
a causal structure among traits, represented by a directed acyclic graph, and
inferred using the inductive causation algorithm.

**2014 - 2016** *Genomic Selection for meat tenderness in Polled Nellore
Cattle*. *Brief Description:* The goal is to estimate genomic breeding values
using SNP data. Analysis is being carried out using prediction models from the
Bayesian Alphabet, including Bayesian Ridge Regression and Bayesian Lasso.

**2012 - 2014** *Different regression models for genomic selection of Brazilian
Polled Nellore are carried out aiming to increase meat tenderness*. *Brief
Description:* Based on the Warner-Bratzler Shear Force (WBSF) index this project
aims to help improve the quality of Nellore meat produced in Brazil. This
research uses reference populations and commercial SNP chips to estimate genomic
breeding values. Scheduled mating is carried out and muscle samples are
collected at the moment of slaughtering for posterior tenderness evaluation.

**2011 - 2014** *Climatic spatialization and longitudinal data analysis of
Nellore cattle raised in the Amazon and Cerrado ecosystem in Brazil*. *Brief
Description:* Spatialization is triggered as an attempt to understand the
climatic factors that help to discriminate the regions were Nellore Cattle are
bred under the Amazon and the Cerrado ecosystems. Phenotypic correlation between
adjusted weights and reproductive traits are under consideration. Indexes for
selection are one of the most important objectives.

**2011 - 2014** *Genotype versus environmental interaction effects on Nellore
productive traits in the tropical humid region of Brazil*. *Brief Description:*
This project is designed to develop heritability estimates of genetic
correlations and breeding values from the Nellore cattle breeding program
(PMGRN-ANCP) in Brazil. The data set is built up over twenty years of field
monitoring and registration.

**2011 - 2013** *Causes of variation in productive and reproductive traits in
Nellore cattle raised in the Amazon region*. *Brief description:* This project
adopts an exploratory approach to detect inbreeding coefficients, general
population structure, covariance and genetic parameter estimation for several
phenotypic variables. The data set contains phenotypic data registration since
1970.

**2010 - 2012** *Genetic trends for adjusted weights at ages 205, 365 and 550
days in Nellore cattle in Northern Brazil*. *Brief Description:* This Project
uses data sets shared by the Brazilian Association of Zebu Breeders. More than
45.388 phenotypic registrations are accounted for. Covariance estimates are
obtained using MTDFREML.

**2009 - 2011** *Objectives and selection criteria in dairy goat breeding in
Brazil*. *Brief Description:* characterization of dairy goat production systems,
identification of objectives, selection criteria, profit, the effect of
modifications in the breeding system are only a few of the goals of this
project. Different levels of technification are established in order to
understand and develop proper technology and also to develop farm level
interventions.

**TEACHING EXPERIENCE**

-   **Co-instructor**, Department of Animal Sciences, University of
    Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA, in 2016, under supervision of Prof. Guilherme
    Jordão de Magalhães Rosa.

>   **09/2017 - 12/2017** Department of Animal Sciences

>   *Quantitative Genetics (AnSci/Genetics 610)*

>   **01/2016 - 05/2016** Department of Animal Sciences

>   *Quantitative Genetics (ansci875)*

-   **Lecture**, Federal University of Goias (UFG), Goiania, GO, Brazil, from
    2011 to 2013, teaching the following courses.

>   **09/2013 - 12/2013** Department of Agronomy

>   *Animal Breeding and Genetic*

>   **03/2013 - 07/2013** Graduate Program in Animal Science

>   *Introduction to SAS software*

>   *Experimental methods in livestock science*

>   **12/2012 - 07/2013** Graduate Program in Animal Science

>   *Estimating genetic parameters (introduction)*

>   *SAS software (introduction)*

>   *Experimental methods in livestock Science*

>   *Data mining*

>   *Multivariate Statistics using SAS software*

-   **Lecture**, Federal University of Tocantins (UFT), Araguaina, GO, Brazil,
    from 2007 to 2008, teaching the following courses.

>   **08/2007 - 12/2007** Department of Animal Science

>   *Technical drawing*

>   *Mathematics*

>   **03/2008 - 12/2008** Department of Animal Science

>   *Basic Statistics*

>   *Introduction in informatics*

>   **03/2008 - 12/2008** Veterinary Department

>   *Mathematics and elementary informatics*

-   **Teacher**, Colegio Pequena Universidade (UNIPOSITIVO), Araguaina, TO,
    Brazil, in 2008, teaching the following courses.

>   **08/2008 - 12/2008** High School

>   *Mathematics*

>   *Physics*

**SHORT COURSES GIVEN**

LOPES, F. B. **Application of Quantitative Genetics and Genomics in Animal
Breeding.** Department of Animal Sciences, Federal University of Alagoas (UFAL),
AL, Brazil 2018.

LOPES, F. B. **Running R on CHTC Cluster.** Department of Animal Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA 2017.

LOPES, F. B. **How to run R using HTCondor?** Department of Animal Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA 2015.

LOPES, F. B. **Multivariate analysis**. Federal University of Goias (UFG),
Goiania, GO, Brazil, 2014.

LOPES, F. B. and MAGNABOSCO, C. U. **Introduction to Bayesian inference and its
application to estimate genetic parameters in beef cattle**. Brazilian
Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa), Goiania, GO, Brazil, 2012.

LOPES, F. B. **Methods to estimate genetic parameters using MTDFREML and WOMBAT
software in finite and infinitesimal models**. Brazilian Agricultural Research
Corporation (Embrapa), Goiania, GO, Brazil, 2012.

LOPES, F. B. **Architecting data and estimating covariance components using SAS
and MTDFREML**. Federal University of Goias (UFG), Goiania, GO, Brazil, 2011.

LOPES, F. B. **Architecting and analyzing data using SAS software.** Federal
University of Tocantins, Araguaina, TO, Brazil, 2011.

LOPES, F. B. and CAVALCANTE, T. V. **Research report on libido investigation in
Santa Ines rams.** Federal University of Tocantins, Araguaina, TO, Brazil, 2006.

**PUBLICATIONS**

**Book chapters**

MACHADO, T. M. M., McMANUS, C. M., PAIVA, S. R., TEIXEIRA, L. T. D., PIRES, L.
C., ARAUJO, R. O., FACAO, O., LOPES, F. B. **Goat Genetics and Breeding. In: Goat
and Sheep Production in the semiarid of Brazil**.1 ed. Brasilia: Embrapa, 2011,
p. 423-459.

**Papers in refereed journals**

PEREIRA, L. S., COSTA, B. M. P., SANTOS, G. C. J., **LOPES, F. B.**, LIRA, T.
S., BARBOSA, S. M., RAMOS, A. T., FERREIRA, J. L. The influence of
transportation on the frequency of cattle carcass injuries in Para, Brazil.
*Archives of Veterinary Science* (*in press*).

MONTESINOS, I. S., SERENO, J. R. B., SILVA, M. C., **LOPES, F. B.**, McMANUS, C.
M. Morphometric evaluation of ewes from the Humedales de Ité (Peru). *Archivos
de Zootecnia* (*in press*).

LOPES, F. B., WU, X.L., LI, H., XU, J., PERKINS, T., GENHO, J., FERRETTI, R.,
TAIT JR., R. G., BAUCK, S., ROSA, G. J. M. Improving accuracy of genomic
prediction in Brangus cattle by adding animals with imputed low-density SNP
genotypes. *Journal of Animal Breeding and Genetics*, v. 135, p. 14-27, 2018.
DOI: 10.1111/jbg.12312.

KLUSKA, S., OLIVIERI, B. F., BONAMY, M., CHIAIA, H. L. J., FEITOSA, F. L. B.,
BERTON, M. P., PERIPOLLI, E., LEMOS, M. V. A., TONUSSI, R. L., LOBO, R. B.,
MAGNABOSCO, C. U., DI CROCE, F., OSTERSTOCK, J., PEREIRA, A. S. C., MUNARI, D.
P., BEZERRA, L. A., **LOPES, F. B.**, BALDI, F. Estimates of genetic parameters
for growth, reproductive, and carcass traits in Nelore cattle using the single
step genomic BLUP procedure. **Livestock Science**, v. 216, p. 203-209, 2018.

PERIPOLLI, E., METZGER, J., DE LEMOS, M. V. V., STAFUZZA, N. B., KLUSKA, S.,
OLIVIERI, B. F., FEITOSA, F. L. B., BERTON, M. P., **LOPES, F. B.**, MUNARI, D.
P., LOBO, R. B., MAGNABOSCO, C. U., DI CROCE, F., OSTERSTOCK, J., DENISE, S.,
PEREIRA, A. S. C., BALDI, F. Autozygosity islands and ROH patterns in Nellore
lineages: evidence of selection for functionally important traits. **BMC
GENOMICS**, v. 19, p. 1-14, 2018.

**LOPES, F. B.**, FERREIRA, J. L., LOBO, R. B., ROSA, G. J. M. Bayesian analyses
of genetic parameters for growth traits in Nellore cattle raised on pasture.
*Genetics and Molecular Research*, v. 16, p. 1-10, 2017. DOI:
10.4238/gmr16039606.

CASTRO, L. M., ROSA, G. J. M., **LOPES, F. B.**, REGITANO, L., ROSA, A.,
MAGNABOSCO, C. U. Genome-wide association mapping and pathway analysis of meat
tenderness in polled Nellore cattle. *Journal of Animal Science*. 95:1945-1956,
2017. DOI: 10.2527/jas2016.1348.

FERREIRA, J. L., BRESOLIN, T., **LOPES, F. B**., GARCIA, J. A. S., NEPOMUCENO,
L. L., SCHMIDT, A. B., LOBO, R.B. Random regression models for growth trait in
Guzerá cattle. *Ciência Animal Brasileira*, v. 18, p. 1-12, 2017.

FERREIRA, J. L., **LOPES, F. B**., GARCIA, J. A. S., SILVA, M. P. B.,
NEPOMUCENO, L. L., MARQUES, E. G., SILVA, M. C. Climate spatialization and
genotype-environment interaction effects on weaning weights of Nellore cattle in
extensive systems in tropical regions of brazil. *Ciência Animal Brasileira*, v.
18, p. 1-13, 2017.

**LOPES, F. B.**, SILVA, M. C., MAGNABOSCO, C. U., SAINZ, R. D. Selection
Indices and Multivariate Analysis Show Similar Results in the Evaluation of
Growth and Carcass Traits in Beef Cattle. *Plos One*, v. 11, p. e0147180, 2016.

MAGNABOSCO, C. U., **LOPES, F. B.**, FRAGOSO, R. C., EIFERT, E. C., VALENTE, B.
D., ROSA, G. J. M., SAINZ, R. D. Accuracy of genomic breeding values for meat
tenderness in Polled Nellore cattle. *Journal of Animal Science*. DOI:
10.2527/jas.2016-0279. 2016.

MAGNABOSCO, C. U., **LOPES, F. B.**, ROSA, G. J. M., SAINZ, R. D. Bayesian
estimates of genetic parameters for reproductive traits in Nellore cows raised
on pasture in tropical regions. *Revista Colombiana de Ciencias Pecuarias*, v.
29, p. 119-129, 2016.

**LOPES, F. B.**, MAGNABOSCO, C. U., SOUZA, F. M., ASSIS, A. S., BRUNES, L. C.
Analysis of longitudinal data in Polled Nellore cattle using nonlinear models.
*Archivos de Zootecnia*, v. 65, p. 123-129, 2016.

**LOPES, F. B.**, MAGNABOSCO, C. U., SOUZA, F. M., ASSIS, A. S., BRUNES, L. C.
Inbreeding effect on pre-weaning weight in polled Nellore cattle raised on
pasture in the Cerrado biome. *Archivos de Zootecnia*, v. 65, p. 177-182, 2016.

SOUZA, F. M., LEMOS, B. J. M., OLIVEIRA JUNIOR, R. C., MAGNABOSCO, C. U.,
CASTRO, L. M., **LOPES, F. B.**, BRUNES, L. C. Introdução de leguminosas
forrageiras, calagem e fosfatagem em pastagem degradada de Brachiaria brizantha.
*Brazilian Journal of Animal Health and Production*, v. 17, p. 355-364, 2016.

GOWANE, G. R., PRINCE, L. L. L., **LOPES, F. B.**, SHARMA, R. C. Genetic and
phenotypic parameter estimates of live weight and daily gain traits in Malpura
sheep using Bayesian approach. *Small Ruminant Research*, v. 128, p. 10-18,
2015.

FERREIRA, J. L., **LOPES, F. B.**, BRESOLIN, T., GARCIA, J. A. S., BARBOSA, S.
M., LOBO, R. B. Effect of age of dam on weight of calf in the genetic assessment
of Zebu cattle in random regression models. *Acta Scientiarum. Animal Sciences*,
v. 37, p. 203-208, 2015.

GOMES, P. H. F., **LOPES, F. B.**, MURAD, B. T. M., GOMES, G. A. T. Use of
multivariate approaches as a support tool to decision making in the hotel
sector. *Enciclopédia Biosfera*, v. 11, p. 2502-2526, 2015.

FERREIRA, J. L., **LOPES, F. B.,** PEREIRA, L. S., NEPOMUCENO, L. L., GARCIA, J.
A. S., LOBO, R. B., SAINZ, R. D. Estimation of (co)variances for growth traits
in Nellore cattle raised in the Humid Tropics of Brazil by random regression.
*Semina. Ciências Agrárias*, v. 36, p. 1713-1724, 2015.

FERREIRA, J. L., **LOPES, F. B.,** LIRA, T. S., GARCIA, J. A. S., LOBO, R. B.,
SAINZ, R. D. Genotype-environment interaction of maternal influence
characteristics in Nellore cattle bred in the Brazilian humid tropical regions
by reaction norm. *Semina. Ciências Agrárias*, v. 36, p.2787-2798, 2015.

FERREIRA, J. L., ASSIS, A. S., **LOPES, F. B.,** MURPHY, T. W., SILVA, M. C.,
GARCIA, J. A. S., MARQUES, E. G. Reaction norms in weights at 365 days old in
Nellore bulls in northern Brazil. *Semina. Ciências Agrárias*, v. 36, p. 1,
2015.

FERREIRA, J. L. LIRA, T. S., **LOPES, F. B.,** GARCIA, J. A. S., LOBO, R. B.,
SAINZ, R. Genotype-environment interaction of maternal influence characteristics
in Nellore cattle bred in the Brazilian humid tropical regions by reaction norm.
*Semina. Ciências Agrárias*, v. 36, p. 2787-2798, 2015.

FRAGA, A. B., SILVA, F. L., HONGYU, K., SANTOS, D. S., MURPHY, T. W., **LOPES,
F. B.** Multivariate analysis to evaluate genetic groups and production traits
of crossbred Holstein - Zebu cows. *Tropical Animal Health and Production*, v.
47, p. 1-6, 2015.

MAGNABOSCO, C. U., **LOPES, F. B.,** MIYAGI, E. S., LOBO, R. B., SAINZ, R. D.
Multivariate approach of inter-relationships among growth, consumption and
carcass traits in Nellore cattle. *Revista Ciência Agronômica*, v.41, p.168 -
176, 2014.

CASTRO, L. M., MAGNABOSCO, C. U., SAINZ, R. D., FARIA, C. U., **LOPES, F. B**.
Quantitative genetic analysis for meat tenderness trait in polled Nellore
cattle. *Revista Ciência Agronômica*, v.45, p.393 - 402, 2014.

**LOPES, F. B.**, MAGNABOSCO, C. U., MAMEDE, M. M. S., MOREIRA, L. C., SOUZA, F.
M., ASSIS, A. S., BRUNES, L. C., NETO, M. D. F., NARCISO, M. G. Parameter and
genetic trends for growth traits in polled Nellore cattle raised on pasture.
*Revista Cientifica Rural*, v. 16, n.1, p. 96-106, 2014.

**LOPES, F. B.**, MAGNABOSCO, C. U., MAMEDE, M. M. S., MOREIRA, L. C., SOUZA, F.
M., ASSIS, A. S., BRUNES, L. C., NETO, M. D. F., NARCISO, M. G. Estimates of
genetic parameters and trends of weight gain from birth to 550 days of polled
Nellore cattle. *Revista Cientifica Rural*, v. 16, n.1, p. 75-88, 2014.

**LOPES, F. B.,** MAGNABOSCO, C. U., MAMEDE, M. M. S., MOREIRA, L. C., SOUZA, F.
M., ASSIS, A. S., BRUNES, L. C., NETO, M. D. F., NARCISO, M. G. (Co)variance
estimation and genetic trend on pre-weaning weight in Nellore polled cattle.
*Revista Cientifica Rural*, v. 16, n.1, p. 62-74, 2014.

**LOPES, F. B.,** MAGNABOSCO, C. U., MAMEDE, M. M. S., MOREIRA, L.C., SOUZA, F.
M., ASSIS, A. S. BRUNES, L. C., NETO, M. D. F., NARCISO, M. G. Effect of
heteroscedasticity on the estimative of (co)variances and genetic parameters for
post-weaning weights in polled Nellore cattle. *Revista Cientifica Rural*, v.
16, n.1, p. 46-61, 2014.

FERREIRA, J. L., **LOPES, F. B**., ASSIS, A. S., LOBO, R. B. Climate
spatialization and longitudinal data analysis of Nellore cattle raised in the
states of Maranhão, Pará and Tocantins using univariate and multivariate
approaches. *Semina. Ciências Agrárias*, v.35, p. 2197-2210, 2014.

FERREIRA, J. L., **LOPES, F. B.**, EVERLING, D. M., BARBOSA, S. M., SILVA, M.
C., LIRA, T. S., FEREIRA, L. S. Impact of heterogeneity of residual variance on
genetic estimates of Nellore cattle from the amazon biome. *Revista Brasileira
de Saúde e Produção Animal*, v.15, p.281 - 288, 2014.

PAUSE, A. G. S., FRANCA, A. F. S., MIYAGI, E. S., DAMBROS, C. E., **LOPES, F.
B**. Efficiency of nitrogen and phosphate fertilization on pearl millet
cultivars. *Ciência Animal Brasileira*, v.15, p.119 - 127, 2014.

FRANCA, E. C., ASSIS, A. S., **LOPES, F. B.**, BARBOSA, S. M., ROSA, F.C.,
FERREIRA, J. L. Phenotypic characterization and decision factors in buying of
organic chicken in the Araguaina city, Tocantins. *Enciclopédia Biosfera*, v.10,
p.840 - 851, 2014.

FERREIRA, J. L., **LOPES, F. B**., MARQUES, E. G., SILVA, M. C., ASSIS, A. S.,
PEREIRA L. S., NEPOMUCENO, L. L. Quantitative genetic study at production traits
of Nellore cattle raised in Northern, Brazil. *Revista Brasileira de Medicina
Veterinária*, v. 36, p. 11-17, 2014.

**LOPES, F. B**., SILVA, M. C., MIYAGI, E. S., FIORAVANTI, M. C. S., FACO, O.,
McMANUS, C. M. Comparison of selection indexes for dairy goats in the tropics.
*Acta Scientiarum. Animal Sciences*, v.35, p.321 - 328, 2013.

GORDO, J. M. L., SILVA, MARCELO C., SOLANO, G. A., **LOPES, F. B.**, COSTA, M.
F., ROCHA, F. E. C. R., FIORVANTI, M. C. S., SERENO, J. R. B. Cattle farmers:
profile and speech content analysis while undergoing training to adopt
artificial insemination in Goias state, Brazil. *Brazilian Journal of Animal
Science*, v.42, p.162 - 167, 2013.

MARQUES, E. G., MAGNABOSCO, C. U., **LOPES, F. B.,** SILVA, M. C. Estimates of
genetic parameters of growth characteristics, carcass and scrotal perimeter in
Nellore cattle evaluated in weight gain performance tests in feedlot.
*Bioscience Journal*, v.29, p.159 - 167, 2013.

**LOPES, F. B**., MAGNABOSCO, C. U., MAMEDE, M. M. S., SILVA, M. C., MYIAGE, E.
S., PAULINI, F., LOBO, R. B. Multivariate approach for young bull selection from
a performance test using multiple traits of economic importance. *Tropical
Animal Health and Production*, v. 45, p. 2, 2013.

SILVA, M. C., PAULINI, F., **LOPES, F. B**., FIORAVANTI, M. C. S., SERENO, J. R.
B. Diversity of farming landscapes and production systems: a starting point to
understand livestock conservation. *Enciclopédia Biosfera*, v.9, p.1 - 24, 2013.

LIRA, T. S., FERREIRA, J., **LOPES, F. B.**, PEREIRA, L. S., FERREIRA, J. L.
FERREIRA, J. L., LOBO, R. B., SANTOS, G. C. J. Genetic trends for growth traits
in Nellore cattle raised in the humid tropical region of Brazil. *Ciência Animal
Brasileira*, v.14, p.23 - 31, 2013.

SILVA, M. C., **LOPES, F. B**., VAZ, C. M. S., PAULINI, F., MONTESINOS, I. S.,
FIORAVANTI, M. C. S., McMANUS, C., SERENO, J. R. B. Morphometric traits in
Crioula Lanada ewes in southern brazil. *Small Ruminant Research*, v.110, p.15 -
19, 2013.

NEPOMUCENO, L. L., LIRA, T. S., **LOPES, F. B.**, LOBO, R. B., FERREIRA, J. L.
Genotype-environment interaction for maternal effect traits in Nellore cattle
from Maranhão, Mato Grosso and Pará states. *Revista Brasileira de Saúde e
Produção Animal*, v.14, p.269 - 276, 2013.

**LOPES, F. B.**, MAGNABOSCO, C. U., PAULINI, F., MIYAGI, E. S., SILVA, M. C.,
LOBO, R.B. Genetic analysis of growth traits in polled Nellore cattle raised on
pasture in tropical region using Bayesian approaches. *Plos One*, v.8, p.e75423,
2013.

SILVA, M. C., VAZ, C. M. S., **LOPES, F. B.**, McMANUS, C., FIORAVANTI, M. C.
S., SERENO, J. R. B. Participation and empowerment: guidelines for on farm
livestock conservation *Archivos de Zootecnia*, v.62, p.93 - 104, 2013.

MARIANI, A. C. B., **LOPES, F. B.,** SOUZA, J. F., DIAS, F. E. F., ARRIVABENE,
M., SOUZA, J. A. T., VIANA, G. E. N., CAVALCANTE, T. V. Influence of the estrus
synchronization protocol and the size of the corpus luteum on the fertility rate
in recipients implanted with embryos produced In Vitro. *Comunicata Scientiae*,
v.4, p.224 - 230, 2013.

SOLANO, G. A., SILVA, M. C., ROCHA, F. E. C., SILVA, D. C., **LOPES, F. B.**,
FIORAVANTI, MARIA C. S., SERENO, J. R. B. Conservation issues for the
traditional Campeiro horse breed in southern Brazil based on farmers´ speech
analysis. *Actas Iberoamericanas de Conservación Animal*, v. 3,8-14, 2013.

LIRA, T. S., PEREIRA, L. S., NEPOMUCENO, L. L., ALEXANDRINO, E., **LOPES, F.
B**., LOBO, R. B. Genotype-environment interaction of post-weaning weights in
Nellore from Maranhão, Mato Grosso and Pará states. *Acta Veterinaria
Brasilica*, v.7, p.282 - 287, 2013.

MAGNABOSCO, C. U., **LOPES, F. B**., MAMEDE, M. M. S., SAINZ, R. D. The use of
genetically improved bulls as a tool to empower productivity of beef cattle
farms. *Revista Colombiana de Ciencias Pecuarias.*, v.26, p.284 - 291, 2013.

**LOPES, F. B**. and FERREIRA, J. L. Economic sensitivity of intense and
semi-intensive dairy goat system: the benefits of tangible and intangible
factors. *Revista Acadêmica: Ciências Agrárias e Ambientais*, v.11, p.403 - 411,
2013.

PEREIRA, L. S., SANTOS, G. C. J., LIRA, T. S., **LOPES, F. B.,** VIERIA, I. A.,
BARBOSA, S. M., RAMOS, A. T., FERREIRA, J. L. Influence of pre-slaughter
management on the frequency of injuries and characteristics of bovine carcasses
from southern Pará state, Brazil. *Revista Acadêmica: Ciencias Agrarias e
Ambientais*, v.11, p.169 - 178, 2013.

SILVA, M. C., FIORAVANTI, M. C. S., SOLANO, G. A., SILVA, D. C., ISKANDAR, G.
R., MOURA, M. I., ROCHA, F. E. C. R., **LOPES, F. B**., SERENO, J. R. B. Content
analysis during a meeting to officialy recognize the traditional Curraleiro Pé
Duro cattle breed in Brazil. *Actas Iberoamericanas de Conservacion Animal*, v.
3, p. 188-193, 2013.

**LOPES, F. B.,** SANTOS, G. C. J., SILVA, M. C., MARQUES, E. G., FERREIRA, J.
L. Genetic trends for characteristics related to the growth rate in Nellore
cattle from northern Brazil. *Revista Ciencia Agronomica*, v.43, p.362-367,
2012.

SANTOS, G. C. J., **LOPES, F. B.,** MARQUES, E. G., SILVA, M. C., CAVALCANTE, T.
V., FERREIRA, J. L. Genetic trends for adjusted weights at 205, 365 and 550 days
of age in Nellore cattle from northern Brazil. *Acta Scientiarum. Animal
Sciences*, v.34, p.97 - 101, 2012.

**LOPES, F. B**., SILVA, M. C., MARQUES, E. G., McMANUS, C. M. Analysis of
longitudinal data of beef cattle raised on pasture from northern Brazil using
nonlinear models. *Tropical Animal Health and Production*, v.41, p.3 - , 2012.

MARQUES, E. G., MAGNABOSCO, C. U., **LOPES, F. B**. Selection indices for
Nellore beef cattle from performance test weight in confinement. *Revista
Brasileira de Saude e Producao Animal*. , v.13, p.669-681, 2012.

**LOPES, F. B**., BORJAS, A. R., SILVA, M. C., FACO, O., LOBO, R. N. B.,
FIORAVANTI, M. C. S., McMANUS, C. M. Breeding goals and selection criteria for
intensive and semi-intensive dairy goat system in Brazil. *Small Ruminant
Research*, v.106, p.110 - 117, 2012.

**LOPES, F. B.,** MAGNABOSCO, C. U., PAULINI, F., SILVA, M. C., MIYAGI, E. S.,
LOBO, R. B. Analysis of longitudinal data of Nellore cattle from performance
test at pasture using random regression model. *SpringerPlus*, v.1, p.49, 2012.

FLORENTINO, C. M., MARIANI, A. C. B., SOUZA, J. F., DIAS, F. E. F., SANTOS, H.
D., CASTRO, A. A. P., LIMA. A. K F., **LOPES, F. B**., CAVALCANTE, T. V.,
WISCHRAL, A. The influence of receptor cows day of estrus manifestation on
pregnancy rate at legal amazon. *Journal of Animal Science Advances*, v.2, p.865
- 872, 2012.

NEPOMUCENO, L. L., ANDRADE, R. J., **LOPES, F. B**., SANTOS, G. C. J., VIEIRA,
L. F., PEREIRA, L. S., LIRA, T. S., FERREIRA, J. L. Genetic and environmental
effects on productive traits of Nellore cattl*e* raised in northern Tocantins,
Brazil. *Revista Acadêmica: Ciências Agrárias e Ambientais*, v.10, p.373 - 382,
2012.

MONTESINOS, I. S., SILVA, M. C., **LOPES, F. B**., FIORAVANTI, M. C. S.,
McMANUS, C., SERENO, J. R. B. Phenotypic characterization of ewes from wetlands,
southern Peru: preliminar data. *Archivos de Zootecnia*, v.61, p.505 - 515,
2012.

**LOPES, F. B**., SILVA, M. C., MIYAGI, E. S., FIORAVANTI, M. C. S., FACO, O.,
GUIMARAES, R. F., JUNIOR, C., OSMAR A., McMANUS, C. M. Spatialization of
climate, physical and socioeconomic factors that affect the dairy goat
production in Brazil and their impact on animal breeding decisions. *Pesquisa
Veterinária Brasileira*, v.32, p.1073 - 1081, 2012.

NEPOMUCENO, L. L., ANDRADE, R. J., **LOPES, F. B**., SANTOS, G. C. J., VIEIRA,
L. F., PEREIRA, L. S., LIRA, T. S., FERREIRA, J. L. Genetic association between
scrotal circumference and productive and reproductive traits in Nellore herds
raised in northern Tocantins state, brazil. *Revista Acadêmica: Ciências
Agrárias e Ambientais*, v.10, p.253-261, 2012.

SALVIANO, M. B., SOUZA, J. A. T., CAVALCANTE, T. V., VIDIGAL, K. F.,
SARRIA-PEREIRA, J. A., **LOPES, F. B**. Integrity of membrane and sperm
chromatin in bucks with and without scrotal bipartition. *Archivos de
Zootecnia*, v.60, p.1319 - 1322, 2011.

**LOPES, F. B**., SILVA, M. C., MARQUES, E. G., FERREIRA, J. L. Fitting of
growth curves of Nellore cattle from northern brazil. *Revista Brasileira de
Saude e Producao Animal*, v.12, p. 607 - 617, 2011.

SANTOS, G. C. J, LIRA, T. S., PEREIRA, L. S., **LOPES, F. B.,** FERREIRA, J. L.
Non-genetic effects on productive traits in Nellore cattle from northern brazil.
*Acta Veterinaria Brasilica*, v.5, p.385 - 392, 2011.

JUNIOR, L. M. A., MORORO, D. L., SILVA, A. G., MANESCHY, R. Q., **LOPES, F. B**.
Implementation of pastures and a silage system in a rural settlement project.
*Enciclopedia Biosfera*, v.6, p.1 - 9, 2010.

FERREIRA, J. L., CAVALCANTE, T. V., MARINHO, J. P., **LOPES, F. B**., BARBOSA,
S. M. Influence of the pre-slaughter handling on the production of beef meat in
Araguaina district, Tocantins. *Revista Cientifica Eletrônica de Medicina
Veterinaria*, v.15, p.01 - 12, 2010.

LISBOA, F. M., NUNES, J. S., SILVA, A. G., KNOECHELMANN, C. M., **LOPES, F. B**.
Sensorial analysis of an alternative drink produced based on local knowledge in
a traditional community in the Amazon. *Enciclopédia biosfera*, v.6, p.1 - 12,
2010.

**LOPES, F. B**., CAVALCANTE, T. V., MARIANI, A. C. B. Evaluation of libido,
seminal quality and testicular perimeter in Santa Ines rams in the north region
of Tocantins. *Pubvet*, v.03, p.1 - 8, 2009.

**LOPES, F. B**., CAVALCANTE, T. V., ROSANOVA, C, DIAS, F. E. F., SILVA, R. F.
Economic analysis of the nutritional and sanitary management on sheep breeding
in farms from the southern region of Tocantins state. *Revista Caatinga*, v.21,
p.43 - 50, 2008.

**OTHER PUBLICATIONS**

LOPES, F. B. **Computing G matrix using large genotype file**. Department of
Animal Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA 2015.

LOPES, F. B., SILVA, M. C., McMANUS, C. M. **How to create maps of Brazil using
SAS software?** Technical Series. Brasilia - DF: INCT, Brazil, 2011.

LOPES, F. B. **Spatialization of States and municipalities of Brazil using
multivariate statistics**. Technical series. Brasilia - DF: INCT, Brazil, 2011.

SILVA, M. C., McMANUS, C. M., SERENO, J. R. B., CASTRO, S., FIORAVANTI, M.C.S.,
**LOPES, F. B.,** VAZ, C., SEIXAS, L. **Crioula Lanada**. Technical series.
Brasilia, DF: INCT, Brazil, 2010.

**SEMINARS GIVEN**

-   *Genomic selection in animals and plants*. Brazilian Agricultural Research
    Corporation - Embrapa, Brasilia, DF, Brazil, January 10th, 2016.

-   *Genomic prediction of meat tenderness using Bayesian regression models*.
    Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation - Embrapa, Brasilia, DF, Brazil,
    December 17th, 2015.

-   *Genomic prediction of meat tenderness using Bayesian regression models*.
    Department of Animal Sciences, UW-Madison, March 3th, 2015.

**FUNDED PROJECTS**

**LOPES, B. F.,** BALDI, F., MAGNABOSCO, C. U., ROSA, G. J. M. Genome-wide
selection and feature subset selection of markers by Bayesian networks in beef
cattle using multiple-trait model. FAPESP/São Paulo State University, Jan 2018 -
Dec 2018, US\$ 55,500.00.

MAGNABOSCO, C. U., **LOPES, B. F.,** EIFET, E. C., ROSA, G. J. M., COSTA, M. F.
O., et. al. Genetic characterization and selection for feed efficiency in
Nellore cattle in the state of Goias. FAPEG/EMBRAPA, Jan 2016 - Dec 2018, R\$
2,271,600.00.

**LOPES, B. F.,** MAGNABOSCO, C. U., ROSA, G. J. M. Genomic selection for meat
tenderness in Polled Nellore Cattle. CNPq/University of Wisconsin-Madison, Oct
2014 - Dec 2015, US\$ 40,858.00.

MAGNABOSCO, C. U., **LOPES, B. F.,** REGITANO, L. C. A., ROSA, G. J. M., COELHO,
A. S. G., et al. Genome-wide association study and genomic selection for meat
tenderness in polled Nellore cattle. CNPq/EMBRAPA, Oct 2013 - Sept 2016, R\$
142,800.00.

MAGNABOSCO, C. U., **LOPES, B. F.,** REGITANO, L. C. A., ROSA, G. J. M., SAINZ
R. D., et. al. Genetic characterization and selection for meat tenderness in
polled Nellore cattle. CNPq/EMBRAPA, Nov 2009 - Oct 2012, R\$ 149,082.64.

**UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT COMMITTEES**

-   PAULO HENRIQUE FERREIRA GOMES & RENATO MELLO SOARES DE LIMA (BS). Analysis
    of online evaluations made by clients concerning Luxury and Superior class
    hotels in Goiania. 2014. Undergraduate in Hotel Management - Federal
    Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Goias, Goiania, Brazil.

-   ADRIANA ALVES DE ANDRADE (BS). Quantitative genetics study using calculated
    weights at age 120 and 210 days in a Nellore herd from Embrapa Cerrados.
    2011. Undergraduate in Zootechny - State University of Goias - UEG.

-   RAFAEL PEDRO ZENY (BS). Biotecnologias da reprodução animal. 2008.
    Undergraduate in Animal Science - Universidade Federal do Tocantins - UFT.

-   RONILDO PORTO DA SILVA (BS). National Program for Family Farming (PRONAF): A
    subsidy for family farming in Arraias, Tocantins. 2008. Undergraduate in
    Animal Science - Federal University of Tocantins - UFT.

-   KEDMA NAYRA MARINHO (BS). Milk production in the State of Goias and the
    participation of Holstein cattle. 2008. Undergraduate in Animal Science -
    Universidade Federal do Tocantins - UFT

-   CARLA REGINA ROCHA GUIMARAES (BS). Estrous synchronization with different
    doses of eCG in Santa Ines sheep in the Southern region of Tocantins. 2008.
    Undergraduate in Animal Science - Federal University of Tocantins - UFT.

-   REGINALDO PEREIRA DE OLIVEIRA (BS). Some aspects about mineral
    supplementation in dairy cattle raised at pastures. 2007. Undergraduate in
    Animal Science - Federal University of Goias - UFT.

-   TATIANE VIEGAS BETTONI (BS). Simulation analysis to evaluate optimal cow
    replacement strategies.in breeding programs. 2007. Undergraduate in Animal
    Science - Federal University of Tocantins - UFT.

**GRADUATE STUDENT COMMITTEES**

-   LETICIA MENDES DE CASTRO (PhD). Pathway analysis based on SNPs from a
    genome-wide association study of meat tenderness in polled Nellore cattle.
    2016. Graduate Program in Animal Science - Federal University of Goias,
    Goiania, Brazil.

-   GENEILDES CRISTINA DE JESUS SANTOS (MS). Genetic and non-genetic factors
    that influence growth traits in Nellore cattle in Northern Brazil. 2013.
    Graduate Program in Animal Science - Federal University of Goias, Goiania,
    Brazil.

-   LETICIA MENDES DE CASTRO (MS). Identification and multiplication of genetic
    material aiming for meat tenderness in Polled Nellore cattle. 2012. Graduate
    Program in Animal Science - Federal University of Goias, Goiania, Brazil.

-   THAYMISSON SANTOS DE LIRA (MS). Genetic and phenotypic trends in Nellore
    cattle raised in humid tropical regions of Brazil: contribution from the
    States of Maranhão, Mato Grosso, Para, Rondônia and Tocantins. 2011.
    Undergraduate in Medicine Veterinary - Federal University of Tocantins - UFT.

**STUDENT SUPERVISIONS (concluded)**

**Co-supervisor of MS Students**

-   ALLINY SOUZA DE ASSIS CAVALCANTE. Characteristics of meat and carcass in
    Zebuine cattle using in vivo and post morten measures: meta-analyses. Animal
    Science Post-Graduation Program - PhD - Federal University of Goias. 2017.

-   FILIPE CHAGAS TEODOZIO DE ARAUJO. Estudo de (co)variâncias e tendência
    genética e fenotipica em caracteristicas produtivas e reprodutivas em
    bovinos da raça Brahman. 2016. Animal Science Post-Graduation Program -
    Federal University of Alagoas.

-   LEONARDO DE SOUSA PEREIRA. Heterogeneity of co-variances while estimating
    genetic parameters in Nellore Cattle. 2012. Post-Graduation Program, Animal
    Science in the Tropics (Federal University of Tocantins).

-   THAYMISSON SANTOS DE LIRA. Effects of the interaction between genotype and
    environment on productive traits of Nellore Cattle. 2012. Post-Graduation
    Program - Animal Science in the Tropics - Federal University of Tocantins).

-   GENEILDES CRISTINA DE JESUS SANTOS. Causes of variation on growing traits in
    Nellore cattle in the North region of Brazil. 2011. Post-Graduation Program,
    Animal Science in the Tropics (Federal University of Tocantins).

**Co-supervisor of PhD Students**

-   BIANCA FERREIRA OLIVIERI. Principal component analyses and causal networks
    on fatty acid profiles in Nellore cattle. Animal Breeding Post-Graduation
    Program - PhD - Sao Paulo State University. 2017.

-   FLAVIA MARTINS DE SOUZA. Breeding goals and economic selection index in
    livestock system in Nelore cattle. Animal Science Post-Graduation Program -
    PhD - Federal University of Goias. 2016.

-   LETICIA MENDES DE CASTRO. Pathway analysis based on SNPs from a genome-wide
    association study of meat tenderness in polled Nellore cattle. 2016. Animal
    Science Post-Graduation Program - PhD - Federal University of Goias.

-   MARIANA M. SANTOS MAMEDE. Mating schedules aiming for meat tenderness in
    Nellore Cattle. 2012. Animal Science Post-Graduation Program - PhD - Federal
    University of Goias.

**PARTICIPATION IN SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL EVENTS**

-   EAAP - 69th Annual Meeting of the European Federation of Animal Science,
    2018, Dubrovnik, Croatia - 2018.

-   4th Meeting of Technical Consultants of the National Association of Breeders
    and Researchers - ANCP (Brazil, 2012).

-   18th National Seminar of the National Association of Breeders and
    Researchers - ANCP - Equilibrium in the Fields: Environment, Productivity
    and Family. 2012.

-   9th Brazilian Buiatrics Congress (Poster presentation, 2011).

-   Workshop on Genetic Improvement for Bio-Economic Sustainability in the
    Cerrado Ecosystem in Central Brazil. 2011.

-   10th International Conference on Goats, (Poster presentation, 2010).

-   3rd Workshop on Intensification of Agro Systems for Beef Cattle Production.
    2010.

-   2nd Amazon Milk Event - Symposium Concerning Milk Production in the
    Brazilian Amazon. 2008.

-   2nd Scientific Initiation Seminar in the Federal University of Tocantins.
    2006.

-   2nd Extension and Research Forum in Araguaina, Tocantins. 1st
    Post-Graduation Forum; 1st Extension and Research Unified Meeting in
    Tocantins - 2004.

**ORGANIZATION OF SCIENTIFIC OR TECHNICAL EVENTS**

-   5th Animal Science week: Symposium on Goat and Sheep Production in Northern
    Brazil. 2008.

-   Workshop on Genetic Improvement for Bio-economic Sustainability in the
    Brazilian Cerrado Ecosystem. 2011.

**ABSTRACTS (proceedings)**

Published 12 papers as a first author and 58 papers as co-author (The 70 papers
can be visualized at: http://lattes.cnpq.br/1399785191420919).

**ORAL PRESENTATIONS**

-   *Improving Prediction Accuracy of Meat Tenderness in Nelore Cattle using
    Artificial Neural Networks*. EAAP - 69th Annual Meeting of the European
    Federation of Animal Science, 2018, Dubrovnik, Croatia.

-   *A study on spatial variation concerning physical, social and economic
    factors that interfere on goat production in Brazil*. 8th Research,
    Education and Extension Congress, 2011, Goiania, Brazil. Annals of the 63rd
    Annual Reunion of the Brazilian Society for Scientific Progress - SBPC,
    2011.

-   *Economic weights for selection objectives in dairy goat systems in Brazil*.
    10th International Conference on Goats, 2010, Recife. Brazil.

-   *Libido tests in Santa Ines rams raised in the municipality of Araguaina,
    Tocantins, Brazil*. 2nd Scientific Initiation Seminar of the Federal
    University of Goias, 2008. Palmas, Brazil.

**JOURNAL REVIEWER**

-   Acta Scientiarum (Animal Sciences)

-   Brazilian Journal of Animal Health and Production

-   Colombian Journal of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine

-   Journal of Animal Breeding and Genetics

-   Pesquisa Agropecuária Brasileira (Online)

-   Tropical Animal Health and Production

**JOURNAL EDITOR**

-   Breeding & Genetics Section, *Animal Journal*

**REVIEWER OF PROJECTS RELATED TO FOMENTATION AGENCIES**

-   JSC - NATIONAL CENTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY EVALUATION

>   **2013 - present** Peer-reviewer of scientific and technical research
>   proposals submitted for grants of the Committee of Science of the Ministry
>   of Education and Science of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

![](media/a4a00e0a690427ff4f7c0f70dd8abfd8.png)

**Fernando Brito Lopes**

*Curriculum Vitae*

*QR Code*
